Add legacy porting guide (#73)
thundernest/developer-docs: add-ons/updating/tb78/convert-legacy.md

> # Converting legacy add-ons

Author: I agree, "legacy WebExtensions" is a better term here.
```suggestion
# Converting legacy WebExtensions
```

> # Converting legacy add-ons

Author: ... and I agree that going from TB60 straight to TB78 would not be a path I'd recommend; feel free to include a note about the need to port legacy add-ons to legacy WebExtensions first.

## Dropping the legacy key and adding new entry points

The technical conversion of a legacy add-on is ridiculously easy: just drop the `legacy` key from the `manifest.json` file.

Now your add-on should install in current versions of Thunderbird without issues, but do nothing. After all, Thunderbird no longer calls anything within your add-on. To fix that, you need one or more entry points.

There are multiple ways to get an add-on to load \(documented [in the WebExtensions course on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/Anatomy_of_a_WebExtension)\), but for a Thunderbird add-on the most common option will be adding a *background script*:
``` // manifest.json
"background": {
  "scripts": ["background-script.js"]
}
```
Adding this secton to `manifest.json` will cause the file `background-script.js` to be loaded and evaluated by Thunderbird. For bootstrapped add-ons, the existing bootstrap script itself is a good starting point for a background script – for overlayed add-ons it may be reasonable to start with an empty script and convert overlays using the guidelines below, gradually building up the background script.

> Contrary to a bootstrap script in a bootstrapped add-on, background scripts will *not* get evaluated in a browser context. Instead they are added to a HTML document ("background page") living in a content process, which has access to [WebExtension APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API) and [MailExtension APIs](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) throgh the `browser` and `messenger` globals. Some APIs may require specific permissions or settings to be specified within `manifest.json`, and some WebExtension APIs may be disabled or missing if they are not relevant to Thunderbird.

Author: I intentionally linked MDN as the list in the Thunderbird docs is incomplete. I thought that was intentional (highlighting especially relevant APIs) – if the list there is intended to be exhaustive, we should add all supported APIs there (and indeed remove the MDN link in this document).

Also, `browser` is important as long as MDN is linked – else the linked pages may be very confusing.

> Contrary to a bootstrap script in a bootstrapped add-on, background scripts will *not* get evaluated in a browser context. Instead they are added to a HTML document ("background page") living in a content process, which has access to [WebExtension APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API) and [MailExtension APIs](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) throgh the `browser` and `messenger` globals. Some APIs may require specific permissions or settings to be specified within `manifest.json`, and some WebExtension APIs may be disabled or missing if they are not relevant to Thunderbird.

Author: (I did not check for all APIs, but the API I personally searched for was `storage` – available in the Thunderbird betas and documented on MDN, but not in the TB list.)

Any interaction with Thunderbird must occur through these APIs. Whenever code needs to be added to the background script, you need to make sure to migrate calls to XPCOM or other native Thunderbird features to these APIs.

## Experiment-ing with new APIs

While the Thunderbird team plans to add more APIs with upcoming releases, the current set of APIs will not be sufficient to port most add-ons. To work around this limitation, add-ons can introduce their own, additional APIs as so-called [*experiments*](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how-to/experiments.html). **Any feature that was available in previous versions of Thunderbird remains available in Thunderbird 78 when using experiments.**

> Experiments consist of three parts:

Author: I assume your comment is about the three parts, and not about the introduction statement? The intro statement is imho essential (what are experiments, when do I need them, what can they do). I was torn on the second part, but included it because of the 'deep' things you mention in the next comment. So this is best discussed below.

> Experiments consist of three parts:

Reviewer: Yes, I clicked on line 29 to add the comment, I refer to the part in lines 29+. Do not know why github decided to display it like that.

3. a *child* implementation implements the API in the content process(es). In most cases, it will get generated automatically to call the parent implementation – but manual adjustments may be necessary if function parameters cannot be transferred to a different process (for example, if an API function accepts a function as argument). If the API does not need to interact with anything running in the main thread, it is also possible to implement an API completely within the child implementation.

   To return values not supported by the [structured clone algorithm](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Structured_clone_algorithm), you may need to clone them into the unprivileged scope of the WebExtension. Usually, that boils down to invoking [`Components.utils.cloneInto()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Tech/XPCOM/Language_Bindings/Components.utils.cloneInto) or a related function with `context.cloneScope` as target scope. Alternatively, you can directly return unprivileged objects created using constructors within `context.cloneScope`.

> 

Reviewer: You lost me here, do we want that much deep stuff in the update guide?

Author: I don't know what level of detail is needed. If this level of detail is not needed, I agree that the whole section can be removed (other than the introduction explaining that there are experiments and linking to the Thunderbird WebExtensions page).

For my most complex add-on (GeneralSync's  integration add-on), these details seem to be essential. I'd argue that they are only relevant if you need to do 'complex' interactions between WebExtension and Experiment code, though.

Example: if you want to write an API that returns an object with async methods to the WebExtension, the naive `return {stuff};` approach does not work.

The Mozilla docs do cover these things, but the information is spread out in multiple places, as they approach some topics from the web side of things (privilege boundaries in JS) and some from the add-on side (experiment structure). So having a short overview on what you _might_ need seems helpful to me. You can argue that addressing this elsewhere would be a better idea than handling it in the guide, though...

Reviewer: We will push this in a second "advanced" document. What you have written so far should not be lost. But it is too much for the initial update description.

Author: Feel free to do so. This should resolve your comment from the thread above, as you can take the generic parts over there as well (or trash them^^).

Full examples for [a simple function with parent and child implementations](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/extensions/webextensions/functions.html) and [events add-ons can listen for](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/extensions/webextensions/events.html) are available in the Firefox source documentation.

If your experiment is so complex that it does not reasonably fit into a single source file, you can use JavaScript modules just like in legacy extensions with some additional boilerplate:
```
const { ExtensionParent } = ChromeUtils.import(
    "resource://gre/modules/ExtensionParent.jsm");
const extension = ExtensionParent.GlobalManager.getExtension(
    "insert-your-extension-id-here@example.com");
const { /* ... exported symbols ... */ } =
    ChromeUtils.import(extension.getURL("path/to/module.jsm"));

// when unloading: (safe to call even if the import is conditional / elsewhere!)
Components.utils.unload(extension.getURL("path/to/module.jsm"));
```

> 

Reviewer: ChromeUtils.import() a JSM via the moz-extension URL from extension.getURL() seems to not work, once you actually install the addon (instead of temp debuging it). See
https://github.com/thundernest/sample-extensions/blob/master/experiment/implementation.js#L23

rootURI.resolve() returns a "file://" path

Can you confirm? I think even Geoff confirmed this.

Author: I can confirm that. I did not yet test modules outside of temp debugging, so it seems I was lured into some false sense of security there...

Best practice: try to write APIs that would be useful for a wide range of add-ons, not just the one you're porting. That way, you can later on propose the API you designed for inclusion in Thunderbird, with your add-on serving as reference implementation. If your APIs become a part of Thunderbird, you no longer need to maintain them as part of the add-on.

## Replacing options

Option windows are replaced by [settings pages](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/Implement_a_settings_page) defined in `manifest.json`:
```
"options_ui": {
  "page": "options.html"
},
```
Instead of an XUL dialog, use the specified HTML document will be accessible to the user through the Add-on manager. From that document, all WebExtension and MailExtension APIs can be accessed in the same way as form a background script. The settings themselves should be stored using one of the new APIs to store data, such as [`storage`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/storage), so it may be necessary to add an experiment to migrate existing settings from nsIPrefBranch or other mechanisms not accessible through modern APIs.

> 

Reviewer: I would like to link to and explain: https://github.com/jobisoft/quicktext/blob/pro/manifest.json#L24-L30
which is the described migration API.

I also would move this section way up, because once you migrated your options, there are no longer in the legacy pref system (at least should not) and than you have to go back and adjust your other code to use the storage.

Author: Feel free to do so!

* **locale** localization for WebExtensions is handled using the [`i18n` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/i18n), which uses a single `messages.json` file to store translations.
* **style** use an experiment to monitor open windows, and inject the style through that experiment
* **overlay** [see section 'Replacing Overlays' below](#replacing-overlays).

There are no direct equivalents to manifest flags, so add-ons now need to provide their own mechanisms to switch code or resources depending on the runtime environment. Relevant information is accessible through the [`runtime` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/runtime/).

> 

Reviewer: I would move this section also way up, even before the options section. The locale stuff is one of the very first things you have to update. We have a tool, which converts the old property and what-not-files to json.

Author: I agree with moving it up, but it should stay below experiments (which will be drastically reduced as discussed above) as it makes direct references to experiments.

To not freak out GitHub's tools more than necessary, I'd propose to do order changes as last step before merging, though ;)

## Replacing Overlays

> If you used XUL overlays, they are now finally gone for good and you must find an alternative. While it is technically possible to write an XUL overlay loader experiment, it is a better idea to re-evaluate the purpose of the overlay:

Reviewer: > While it is technically possible to write an XUL overlay loader experiment, it is a better idea ...

Is that a reaction to what I did with quicktext? :-) I created that overlay API as a proof-of-concept for addons, where the authors do not want to invest any time but would be a great loss if not avail in TB78. That will be the minimum effort conversion to keep them alive a few more years, before experiments get turned off.

Author: No, I was not aware of QuickText back then. Though I admit that had to smirk when I looked at QuickText later on :P
Given that not having an overlay loader API in Thunderbird seems like a deliberate choice, I did not want to divert from the 'official' path here.

I have to disagree on the 'experiments get turned off' thing, though. I just don't see the Thunderbird devs to intentionally disable a useful feature for some pseudo-security – but I would expect more prominent warnings and/or an explicit opt-in requirement for the user (and likely the administrator in an enterprise context).

> * For overlays extending the user interface in a way that can be replaced using calls to built-in APIs: do those calls in a background script (Example: adding context menu items)

Reviewer: Here we should go in much more detail and explain the actionPopups and menu API.

Author: I haven't looked into that, but it would be a welcome addition :)

* For overlays extending the user interface in a generalizeable way: add an experiment with an API for the generic customization (Example: adding toolbar buttons to a toolbar without an existing API; use existing toolbar APIs as reference)
* For overlays loading a script without user interface relationship: move the script's content to a background script (Example: startup script in a main window overlay)

If a part of an overlay cannot be replaced with one of the suggestions above, it may be reasonable to replace the overlay with a specific function in an experiment.

## Replacing XUL windows and dialogs

While it would be possible to attempt to re-use existing XUL code in an experiment, it is probably a better idea to use the more future-proof [`windows` MailExtension API](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/windows.html) to create a window displaying an HTML dialog. From these dialogs, all WebExtension and MailExtension APIs can be accessed in the same way as from a background script.

> Note that current builds of Thunderbird will, by default, display an ugly URL bar on top of all windows created through the `windows` API. Specifying the type `panel` or `detached_panel` may hide the URL bar in some future configurations. Either way, the HTML of the dialog will most likely be re-useable with any future mechanism to open windows.

Reviewer: > Specifying the type `panel` or `detached_panel` may hide the URL bar in some future configurations

I just stumbled accross that today. Where do you got those info from? It would be so great if that URL bar would be gone...

Author: It is a documented type that is currently disabled, but there is no reason why it couldn't get enabled again. But there have been some recent developments (https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1644961) – so this information is already obsolete. :)

The technical conversion of a Legacy WebExtension is ridiculously easy: just drop the `legacy` key from the `manifest.json` file.

Now your add-on should install in current versions of Thunderbird without issues, but do nothing. After all, Thunderbird no longer calls anything within your add-on. To fix that, you need one or more entry points.

There are multiple ways to get an add-on to load \(documented [in the WebExtensions course on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/Anatomy_of_a_WebExtension)\), but for a MailExtension the most common option will be adding a *background script* to `manifest.json`:
```json
"background": {
  "scripts": ["background-script.js"]
}
```
Adding this secton to `manifest.json` will cause the file `background-script.js` to be loaded and evaluated by Thunderbird. For bootstrap typed Legacy WebExtensions, the existing `bootstrap.js` script itself is a good starting point for a background script – for overlay typed Legacy WebExtensions it may be reasonable to start with an empty script and convert overlays using the guidelines below, gradually building up the background script.

> Contrary to the bootstrap script in legacy add-ons, the background scripts will *not* get evaluated in a browser context. Instead it is added to an HTML document (a.k.a the "background page") living in a content process, which only has access to [MailExtension APIs](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) and [some WebExtension APIs](new linkable header in API doc being added by geoff soon) inherited from the underlying Firefox code base. Any interaction with Thunderbird must occur through these APIs. Whenever code needs to be added to the background script, you need to make sure to migrate calls to XPCOM or other native Thunderbird features to these APIs.

Author: Obviously, we cannot merge the pull request before the link is there. Just adding this as a reminder.

{% hint style="info" %} Since the WebExtension technology originates in Browser like Google Chrome and Firefox, the namespace for this new kind of API is `chrome.*` or `browser.*`which work in Thunderbird as well. For Thunderbird however the additional namespace `messenger.*` has been added. We think that is a better fit and should be used with MailExtensions, as they do not run in Browsers anyhow, if they use any of the MailExtension APIs, which only exist in Thunderbird. {% endhint %}

> [//remove? //Some APIs may require specific permissions or settings to be specified within `manifest.json`, and some WebExtension APIs may be disabled or missing if they are not relevant to Thunderbird.]

Author: Obviously, this comment cannot get merged as well :P

Imho mentioning permissions might be valuable, but given that they are mentioned on the linked page that's not too important. The 'stuff from Firefox may be missing' note was only necessary in combination with the MDN link, so it can go.

Adding this secton to `manifest.json` will cause the file `background-script.js` to be loaded and evaluated by Thunderbird. For bootstrap typed Legacy WebExtensions, the existing `bootstrap.js` script itself is a good starting point for a background script – for overlay typed Legacy WebExtensions it may be reasonable to start with an empty script and convert overlays using the guidelines below, gradually building up the background script.

Contrary to the bootstrap script in legacy add-ons, the background scripts will *not* get evaluated in a privileged browser context. Instead it is added to an HTML document (a.k.a the "background page") living in a content process, which only has access to [MailExtension APIs](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) and some WebExtension APIs inherited from the underlying Firefox code base (they are listed further down on [this page](https://thunderbird-webextensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)). Any interaction with Thunderbird must occur through these APIs. Whenever code needs to be added to the background script, you need to make sure to migrate calls to XPCOM or other native Thunderbird features to these APIs.

> {% hint style="info" %} Since the WebExtension technology originates in Browsers like Google Chrome and Firefox, the namespace for this new kind of API is `chrome.*` or `browser.*` which work in Thunderbird as well. For Thunderbird however the additional namespace `messenger.*` has been added. We think that is a better fit and should be used with MailExtensions, as they do not run in Browsers anyhow, if they use any of the MailExtension APIs, which only exist in Thunderbird. {% endhint %}

Author: When reading the hint box again, the last sentence seems too long / complex.
```suggestion
{% hint style="info" %} Since the WebExtension technology originates in Browsers like Google Chrome and Firefox, the namespace for this new kind of API is `chrome.*` or `browser.*` which work in Thunderbird as well. Thunderbird also supports `messenger.*`, which is a better fit for MailExtensions. As most MailExtensions are not supported by Browsers anyhow, it is safe to always use `messenger.*` when accessing Mail- or WebExtension APIs. {% endhint %}
```

As experiments usually run in the main process and have unrestricted access to any aspect of Thunderbird, they are expected to require updates for each new version of Thunderbird. To reduce the maintainance burden in the future, it is in your own interest to use experimental APIs only to the extent necessary for the add-on.

Best practice: Try to write APIs that would be useful for a wide range of add-ons, not just the one you're porting. That way, you can later on propose the API you designed for inclusion in Thunderbird, with your add-on serving as reference implementation. If your APIs become a part of Thunderbird, you no longer need to maintain them as part of the add-on.

A more thorough description of experimental APIs can be found in a [separate article](experiments.md).

## Replacing options

Option windows are replaced by [settings pages](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/Implement_a_settings_page) defined in `manifest.json`:

```json
"options_ui": {
  "page": "options.html"

> },

Author: Adding a `,` makes the block invalid JSON (I thus removed it in my last revision). Was there a reason for re-adding it?

Reviewer: I had a merge conflict and manually pasted changes.I missed this one.
